...but if we were to see
Wages fall by seven times,
people would be out in the streets rioting,
saying “Oh, it's economic collapse”
but if you see House prices
rise by seven times, people say,
“Oh my God,
the economy is so strong!”
Okay so the devaluation of money is a
big feature of our economy for the last
20-30 years, especially
the last three or four years.
It's going to continue to be a big feature of
our economy for probably a long time to come.
It's very often misunderstood.
If you want to understand what is happening
and what is going to happen,
you need to understand it.
So I think the first thing we
need to talk about is basically
what is meant by the
‘devaluation of money’?
It can be a little bit of a
confusing concept, right?
Because I think a lot of us have
deeply internalised the idea
that the value of money is constant.
£1 is worth £1, $1 is worth $1.
If the price of things in the shops go up,
we tend to think that's the price
of the things changing.
We don't think that the value of money is changing
and this is basically completely incorrect.
The value of money is very volatile.
It changes a lot. In fact,
systemically, we have we have
designed our economic system
to basically ensure that the
value of money falls over time.
What does this mean and
how can you understand it?
So I was a foreign exchange trader
for a number of years
from 2008 to 2013-14.
And when you offer an exchange traded,
you're literally sitting there
and you're seeing all of the different currencies
that exist in the world.
Every currency,
every country has its own currency.
And you're seeing the different prices of the
different currencies move up and down over time.
So if you watch the business news,
they might say the value of the pound has fallen
1% against the value of the dollar.
It has fallen to one and a half percent
against the value of the euro.
And this is one way of understanding
that the value of of money and of
different currencies is not constant, different
currencies are going up and down every day.
Sometimes they can move really big amounts, like
when Brexit happened the value of the pound fell.
Something like 10-15% against the dollar
and the euro in a very short period of time.
So this is your first indicator
that the value of of money is not constant,
but actually
money is even more volatile in its value
than you might think.
If you just look at the foreign exchange markets.
And the reason for that is very often
the different
currencies of different countries move together.
So in my opinion, in the couple of years
after COVID,
what we saw was a simultaneous devaluation
of a number of currencies.
At the same time,
the value of the pound fell, the value of the euro
fell, the value of the dollar fell,
the value of lots of currencies fell.
Now, if the value of the pound
and the euro fall together
and you are accustomed to valuing
the pound by looking at
how much it costs in terms of a euro,
then you won't see that movement.
Imagine the value of the pound and the dollar
and the euro all fall at the same time.
If you look at the value of the pound
in terms of euros, in terms of dollars,
you might see that it's constant.
So what's happened there is money
has been devalued and you have not seen it.
So what does it mean to you
and how would you see it if the value of a number
of different currencies or all of the main
currencies fell at the same time?
Because you wouldn't see it in foreign exchange
markets, right?
Well, if that happens, what you see
is the price of a wide variety of goods
and services, wages, asset prices going up
because those prices are valued
in terms of pounds or euros or dollars
that are going down.
So essentially what i'm trying to explain to
you, what i'm trying to get you to see
is that the devaluation of currency
can be seen as inflation.
In fact,
I'd probably go so far as to say
inflation and the devaluation of
currency are the same thing.
And it's probably worth sitting and thinking
about that for a while because it's not
I think it's not something that we take in easy.
I think a lot of us have
deeply internalised this idea
that the value of money is constant,
and if the price of, say, a carton of eggs
or house or milk in the supermarket goes up,
then it is those things that have changed.
But in actuality,
when all of the prices go up together,
it's much more likely
that the value of money has changed.
And I think during COVID,
what we saw was a really interesting situation
where governments all over the world
printed and gave out enormous amounts of money.
So the UK government gave out £700 billion.
That's £14,000 per adult.
The US government gave out $8 trillion, which is
$25,000 per person in the country
and immediately afterwards
we saw all the prices go up
of basically everything and very
few people in the media said
whats probably happened is money
has been devalued, even though I think that's
very likely that the most likely cause.
So what I want you to understand
is that the value of money is very,
very volatile, very, very variable.
It tends to go down over time.
And we don't necessarily
see that in foreign exchange markets
because the different moneys
and the different currencies
tend to move together.
And when that happens, different money,
different currencies being devalued together,
what we see rather than moves
in the foreign exchange market,
what we see is inflation.
So next what I you to understand
is that this process
the continued devaluation of money
by inflation as inflation you see it as inflation
but they are in fact the same thing is
an intentional, purposeful, designed
aspect of our economy that we live in.
So the central banks, the Bank of England,
the Federal Reserve in the States, European
Central Bank, the basically the government bank,
which is trying to manage your economy,
intentionally targets positive inflation.
That is basically the consensus of mainstream
economists nowadays because
we want to have inflation in general
they don't want to have inflation
as high as it is now.
Inflation is still above 10% in the UK.
It's not far below
that In a lot of other countries.
Economists tend to want to have inflation
of about 2-2.5% percent a year.
So what that means is
economists want money to be devalued by two,
two and a half percent.
this is part of the way
our economic system is designed.
The constant,
hopefully, according to most economists,
gradual devaluation of currency.
Obviously, in the last few years
it's been much more rapid.
But they want that to happen,
designed intentional part of the system.
Why do they want that to happen?
That's quite a big question,
which will probably deal with another video.
Economists think that allowing money
to be devalued or allowing inflation to be
positive is good for the economy.
I would argue that's probably because essentially
it enables
corporations to cut workers wages over time.
It's very difficult for corporations
to cut your actual wage
because they have to convince you
to sign a new contract at a lower wage.
You probably say no.
But if we are automatically devaluing
money by 2-3% a year,
then your wage is automatically being devalued
2-3% a year and your company doesn't
have to actively cut your wage.
In fact, you have to actively fight
against your wage being cut.
So this is a bigger question,
which we'll probably cover
in more detail in another video but economists.
want inflation to happen, which means they
want currency to be devalued, I would argue,
because it enables corporations to cut your wages,
which which they think is good for the economy.
But this positive inflation
rate, this positive rate
of devaluation, of money,
of devaluation, of your wages,
it actually significantly underestimates
the real rate at which money is being devalued.
Why is that?
So the inflation rate, which you see on the news
in this country, they normally call it CPI.
They could call it a different thing.
Wherever you're watching
those standard measures of inflation,
almost all of them
only look at goods and services.
The prices of the things that you buy,
excluding asset prices,
so excluding most obviously, house prices, but
also things like stock prices, land prices,
basically the cost of any the price of any assets.
Why is that relevant?
Why is that important?
Well, that is because in the last 20-30 years,
and we cover this in more detail in the video,
‘The Asset Economy’
In the last 20-30 years, asset prices
have very consistently risen at a faster rate
than goods or services.
The period where this is most obvious is the
10-15 years after 2008, after the financial crisis,
where for most of that period inflation
was quite low, sometimes as low as 1% or 2%.
But asset prices
increased really, really significantly
over that period.
It's important to realise it's not just housing.
When I talk about asset prices, people
tend to think immediately about house prices
because it's the asset price that is most visible.
But this was a really broad
land prices went up, stocks and
share prices went up massively.
Even things like luxury art & luxury cars,
durable natural resources
all saw really significant increases in price.
So asset prices are inflating
at a much faster rate than goods and services.
That's not included in the inflation
rate that you see.
So what that means is
the inflation rate,
which only looks at goods and services,
significantly underestimates the actual rate
at which currency is being devalued.
Okay, so why is this happening? now
This is something that I've been really interested
in for a long period of time,
and it's something I've thought about a lot.
And in my opinion, the root cause for this,
the large scale, consistent devaluation of money,
is growth in wealth inequality.
And I will explain why.
And I've touched a little bit on previous videos
that one of the key features of growing wealth
inequality is increasing asset prices
relative to wages in goods and services.
The reason for this is most people
in ordinary financial positions
or poor financial positions
tend to spend all of their income over
the course of their life on goods and services.
They generally die without any accumulated assets,
which means that they've spent everything
on goods and services.
Ordinary people buy goods and services
that drives wages.
Rich people, on the other hand,
especially very rich people,
tend to spend the majority
of their income on buying more assets.
So that means
if wealth inequality increases in society,
ordinary and poor people have less rich
and very rich people have more.
Society as a whole will start to want more assets
and less goods and services.
And that is because we're moving
purchasing power away from ordinary people
who like goods and services towards rich
and very rich people who like to buy assets.
So as inequality increases, asset prices
naturally go up.
Goods and services and wage prices
naturally go down.
But if you remember,
our central banks are trying to ensure
that goods and services prices specifically
keep going up at 2, 2.5, 3% a year
because we have rising inequality.
Those goods and services prices,
they want to go down because ordinary people
who drive
those prices are losing their purchasing power.
That means that for most of the last 20,
30 years, central banks have been trying
to convince ordinary people to spend money
by cutting their interest rates.
But remember those cutting interest rates?
Not only do they drive up ordinary prices,
they also drive up asset prices for the rich.
But asset prices for the rich are going up anyway
because the rich people are getting more
and more and more money.
So what's happening
is this Inequality is driving down wages,
driving down the price of goods and services,
and that forces action from central banks
and governments, central banks to cut interest
rates, governments to spend more money
to try and support the economy.
And a side effect of that is the rich get even
richer and asset prices go up even more.
So there are two simultaneous things
happening at the same time
increasing inequality, which pushes
asset prices up and wages, goods and services
down, and stimulus
from central banks and governments,
which devalues currency and pushes everything up.
Now, as this happens,
the consequence is that the rich get richer
even more and are able to buy even more assets
from the middle class, from the working class,
which drives even further
this dynamic of growing wealth inequality,
which pushes asset prices up more, pushes
spending power down more, which means we have to
do even more and even more so in a sense,
what you're seeing is another one of these
sort of death spirals of the economy,
which is inequality is going up and up and up.
That's forcing action from our
economic institutions like central banks,
which drives interest rates down and
drives asset prices up even more.
Now, this this is something
I started to realise in sort of 2010, 2011.
I remember a conversation I had on the trading
floor with a trader who I was working with in
I think it was 2011
when he said, I'm going to sell the stock market
because the economy is very weak
and the stock market is very strong.
That shouldn't be happening. I'm going to sell
the stock market is going to go down.
What I said to him was, listen,
stocks never go down
because when the economy is weak,
ordinary people spending power is weak.
That forces governments and central banks
to pump more money into the system
that ends up with the rich.
And those people ultimately buy stocks.
And I think one of the most interesting
things of the last 20 years and we've seen this
really strongly in the last three years,
is that increasingly weak economies are associated
with growth in asset
prices, stock prices, house prices.
I think the most obvious example of
that is the last three years, and in particular
the last one year.
So in the last one year we have seen in the UK
new all time
historic records for gold price,
the stock market and house prices.
You record all time highs for the three.
The three significantly significant assets
are not supposed to be correlated in the time
of probably the biggest economic weakness
we have seen since the Second World War.
And I think this is
because whenever there is economic weakness,
our economic
institutions, central banks and governments
respond by devaluing the currency,
which tends to drive asset prices up,
which tends to support rich people.
And ultimately,
as we've seen in the last couple of years,
doesn't really support ordinary
working people in working families.
Okay, so what's the conclusion?
Money is being consistently devalued
as a result of our economies
and our economic institutions,
like central banks and governments
trying to deal with the negative effects
of growing inequality.
This will continue to happen
more and more, and it's very easy
to predictand very easy to see
that in the next 5-10 years
we will see significantly increased growth
in house prices, stock prices, asset prices.
As governments and central banks
are forced to pour loads of money into the economy
to try to rescue struggling consumers,
which ends up with the rich
driving further spiralling increases
in asset prices and stock prices.
I think the most important thing
to understand here is that
the institutions which we have designated
to protect our economy and to protect
working families
because of their own poor
understanding of what is happening,
they are inadvertently fuelling
a fire of inequality which nobody is putting out.
And just like I said, in our
death of the middle class video,
we can really
there are some things which I can predict
with really, really strong confidence,
which is that inequality will increase.
The middle class will cease to exist
and asset prices will continue
to go much, much higher.
And that includes house prices.
The conclusion,
the effect of that on ordinary people
is that ordinary families will lose their property
and will struggle more and more to buy property
and social mobility will collapse.
And we speak more about that in the asset economy.
The asset economy video.
So again, it's another very pessimistic video.
But I think what
it helps us to understand is that
rising asset prices are devaluation of currency,
which is driven
ultimately by increased inequality,
which nobody's fixing.
But if we address those growths in inequality,
we can we can reverse that relative change, right?
So rather than asset prices going
up significantly, while wages stagnate.
We can we can start to see wages
catch up with asset prices, which will increase
ordinary families ability to own property, to
reach financial security and to have a good life.
And those are things which are possible
if we deal with the wealth inequality
and which will not be possible if we don't. So,
yes, support the channel, promote the channel,
help us to explain to people the importance
of dealing with inequality and the consequences
for ordinary families and for our society.
Thank you very much.
No. So
I'm not actually against the currency devaluation.
I think what the currency devaluation does is
it obscures a little bit what is happening.
Because
here's an interesting thing to think about, right?
In the last 30 years,
house prices have risen relative
to wages, maybe five times, five or six times.
Right.
And there's two ways
that an increase in house prices
relative to wages can manifest
either an increase in house prices
or a decrease in wages.
Right.
There is a change in the relative price.
Can be this one going up or this one going down.
And by manipulating
the currency, the value of the currency,
you can choose which one of those you get.
So say, for example, you're in an economy where
wages were falling and house prices were constant.
If you combine that with aggressive devaluation
of currency, you can bring both of them up.
So instead of wages falling,
what you see is house prices rising.
Right.
So what is real is relative prices.
But what we can affect by changing
the value of the currency is absolute prices.
So we can change wages falling into house
prices rising.
That makes sense. Okay.
And what that
does, which I think is really interesting,
is it massively changes
the perception of what's happened.
So falling wages
is very similar to rising house prices
because what matters is the relative price.
But if we were to see wages fall by seven times,
people would be out in the streets
rioting saying, Oh, it's economical up.
But if you see house prices rise by seven times,
people say,
Oh, my economy is so strong.
If house prices and stock prices
go through the roof.
People think it's great.
But if wages collapse, people think it's terrible.
So I think
understanding the devaluation of currency
helps us see
what's actually happening, which is that rising
house prices is the same as falling wages.
And I think it's
I think that's a really interesting thing
for people to understand that
rising house prices are
the same as fall as falling wages. So
I think
once you have the growth in inequality,
then you must have the growth
in relative price of assets relative to wages
because you've shifted the spending power
to people who want assets.
And then we have a choice through on wages.
The full do want house prices to rise.
Well, the truth is, I think house
prices are rising is less painful for society
than wages falling,
but it's still painful for society.
So I think and I think this is actually something
I see a lot,
both from mainstream economists
and from kind of alternative
economists on the Internet, is
they focus on problems with the monetary system.
So mainstream economists will say,
oh, the problem is interest
rates are too high or interest rates are too low.
And a lot of people on the Internet will sell.
The problem is the banking system.
But very few people are looking
at the real increase in real wealth
inequality of real wealth.
And I think
once you have that growth in wealth inequality,
probably devaluing the
currency is the least painful way to hit society,
because then you say rather than dropping wages,
we're going to raise house prices.
That's not to say that I think house
price rises is a good thing.
What I'm saying is
the root problem is the growth in the wealth
inequality, not the devaluation of the currency.
I think you had to do that.
You know, if, for example, in COVID
we hadn't devalued the currency,
what you would have seen is massive,
massive deflation, massive collapse in prices.
And I think that would have been
more damaging for us.
It would have been more like a Great Depression
kind of thing.
I think 2008, I think really probably
the main difference in 2008
and the Great Depression,
which were both at the heart of it banking crisis,
is that in 2000
we aggressively divided the currency.
And that's not to say that we got good
outcomes in 2008.
So a massive decrease in living standards,
but it's better than the Great Depression. So
I want to make clear the point I'm trying to make,
which is I actually don't think
the devaluation of the currencies
is the core problem.
I think it's the increase in inequality
that is the core problem.
And if you try to revalue the currency
without dealing with the inequality,
you would actually make the problem worse.
It's it's a little bit like you have a disease
and then you get an immune response
and then you get rash and it's your immune system,
you know, I mean,
but the problem is not your immune system.
The problem is the disease.
The root cause is the growth of inequality.
So yeah, I think sometimes
people think that I'm well,
I get criticised both for being too critical of
and not critical enough of the central banks.
I think that the central bank
is not the core of the problem.
The problem is inequality.